Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Elizabeth Bick. She's a
microbiologist and scientific integrity consultant. And today we're going
to talk about mainly the topics of scientific integrity
and scientific fraud. So, Doctor Bick, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
My pleasure to be here with you, Ricardo.
So let's start perhaps with some definitions or uh
to explain some terms here, some basic terms. So
where is integrity in the context of science?
Well, integrity is about honesty, about, uh, truthfully reporting
what you have found during your experiments. So, and
that, that is actually, I think for me, the
heart of what science should be. It's, it's about
finding the truth. So we do interviews, we research,
we are in the lab, uh, we try to
cure patients. But I feel when we write our
scientific papers about it, we need to truthfully report
on what we have found. So basically, it's about
honesty and, and not lying about really reporting what
you found, not leaving out the results you didn't
want, um, not cutting corners, also being um ethical
in a way to your uh to your patients,
to your animals that you might use in animal
experiments, to your co-authors. Now, usually, science integrity is
not, it, it, it depends a little bit on
the definition, but for me, it's this whole, this
whole range, uh, this whole spectrum of being honest
towards your data and your colleagues and your, um,
yeah, the experiments that you do.
And on the other hand, what is scientific fraud?
What counts as scientific fraud?
Well, there, uh, it's, it's basically cheating and lying.
Um, THERE'S, uh, there's different, different definitions for countries
in the United States where I live. Um, IT'S
usually one of three things. So there's, there's 3
types of science fraud that you could, um, that
you could, could look at. So, the first one
is plagiarism. Where you would, um, you would copy
somebody else's text or ideas, but not give credit
to the person who was, who was first. So
that is one type of misconduct. The second type
is falsification, where a person obtains results, but changes
them a little bit. Let's say. Um, A particular
patient or a particular experiment had an outcome, but
it didn't quite was the outcome you had hoped
as a researcher. So you change some of the
data and now, oh, suddenly it's a positive or
a negative, and that would be falsification. And the
third type of misconduct is fabrication, and that is
completely making up results. So typing in some numbers
in a spreadsheet, making a graph, etc. WITHOUT actually
going in the lab and making, uh, and, and
doing measurements and things like that. So completely making
up results. So those are the, the three types
of science misconduct, but Those are the more extreme
types. There's, there's a lot of in between, in
between being completely honest and completely fraudulent. There's a
lot of gray zone. So usually we call those
questionable research practices, uh, where, let's say you're a
little bit sloppy, you don't label your, your data
very well, and so you, you make an error
when you report on the data. And, and that's
a very big middle zone. And it's sometimes very
hard to know if a person really had an
intention to mislead, which would be misconduct, or was
just sloppy. There's, it, it's very hard to distinguish
between those, uh those things.
So I also want to understand here what are
some of the factors behind scientific fraud, what leads
to scientific fraud and stuff like that. So, uh
let me start by asking you about perhaps the
individual incentives that people might have in science. So
what individual incentives actually do scientists have to commit
fraud?
Well, we love metrics as scientists, um, and our
bosses love metrics. We love to, uh, to ask
people how many papers did you publish and what
was their impact factor and what was their, uh,
how many times were they cited, your age index,
uh, how many of your papers were in nature
or in science. So scientists, but also the people
above them, the institutions. Um, THE hiring committees, people
who hire new faculty, for example, they love to
look at those numbers, those metrics. And, and yeah,
if you, if you don't have very good metrics,
if you didn't publish that, that much, or you
weren't cited that much, or your results are just
not very nice, so it's hard to publish, it
is very tempting to cheat. It's like doping in
sports, right? Like if you see Everybody using doping
and everybody winning, um, and you're trying to be
honest, but you see everybody around you uses doping,
uh, or in science is cheating. It's very tempting
to also cheat because you see people winning races.
You see people in science publishing papers who cheat.
And so it is. Uh, AS long as there's
no, um, uh, consequences for cheating, and you see
a lot of cheating around you, I think other
people are starting to cheat. So it depends on
your environment. If you, if you grow up as
a scientist, if you work in a lab where
everybody cheats, you're tempted to do it as well,
because otherwise your results are not as great as
those folks around you and And yeah, I think
we put too much emphasis on positive results, on
amazing findings, uh, on, on numbers, on metrics, and
that is ultimately what leads to cheating, but it
also differs from country to country. So, in some
countries, the pressure to publish is higher. There's even
Um, money you can, you can earn if you
publish a paper, um, you might get a promotion
and, and so it depends per country, and that
is why we see that in some countries, there
seem to be a little bit more cheating than
in other countries. It's not because those, those people
are more, uh, you know, are better cheaters or
bigger cheaters. It's because of these monetary incentives or
these other, uh, incentive structures that lead people to
cheat.
This is also tied at least to some extent
with uh career advancements, right, because since the scientists
are sort of forced to publish X number of
papers per year depending on the country, uh, then
that also went. HAS to do with them being
able to advance in their career,
right? Yeah, absolutely. If we, if we really hold
scientists accountable to how many papers they publish, then
people are going to find ways to to make
that happen. But in science, you don't always get
the results you want, uh, you know, your cells
don't want to grow or, or the results are
different than you expected. And I, I feel it's
not the right way to measure if a scientist
is good. Um, WE should not be looking too
much at, at how many. Did you publish and
how many were in science. I don't think that
necessarily tells you if that person is a better
scientist than a person who works slowly and only
publishes maybe one paper for 2 years or, or
even longer. Like, I think good science needs time.
And if we, if we force people to publish
once a year, people are gonna find creative ways
to, to get, make that happen, and that might
involve cheating.
And do you think that there's anything about how
science as an institution is designed that promotes wrong
or not?
Yeah, it, it is because those that focus on,
on, uh on numbers and I think most scientists
who are successful will have um a page saying
how many, you know, a list of all their
papers and a list of all their citations and
all the prizes that they would that they won.
And I think this is how society. Is that,
that's just the way it is. But I think
we focus a little bit too much. And, and
especially when we, let's say, hire, uh, I don't
say we because I don't actually hire people, but
when, when um people are Looking for a new
professor at the university, they will look at resumes
and, you know, as in any other job, obviously,
but we, we put a lot of focus on
how many papers did somebody publish, uh, all these
metrics, all these citations, and universities do the same.
They. They love to be the number one in
their country. They love and those uh lists of
what is the best university is often those lists
are often based also on number of citations, numbers
of Nobel Prizes a university has one number of.
Yeah, uh, science publications or nature publications. So all
of us are in this rat race to look
at these numbers. And yeah, that is just the
way that science is organized. And there's just not
enough focus on things like open science on rigor,
on how, how, uh, you know, how well we,
we, uh, report on our data, uh, not on.
Reproducibility and those are also very important factors of
science, but if you do them as a scientist,
if you let's say work on really good methods
to publish your paper so that other people can
reproduce it or you share all your data, those
things cost time and they're not always rewarded by
the institutions who just focuses on a number of
publications, things like mentorship. Uh, HOW do you, how
do you guide your graduate students, uh, through the
early phases of their career, or how many papers
did you peer review, or how many times did
you do social outreach or, uh, try to, uh,
go to a pub and explain to people. Science
and how great it is, those things are often
not rewarded for us as scientists, and they're, they're
equally good. I feel that those things also make
a really great scientist, but it's really hard to
put them on your resume and to make them
count.
And when it comes to the publication system itself,
is the fact that negative results tend to not
get published or at least not as much as
the positive ones also a big problem?
Yes, that, that is a big problem. And, and
that, that ties back to reproducibility. BUT because sometimes
there, there's a publication with amazing findings, and people
try to reproduce it, and they, they want to
build on that work, and this is how science
work. We build on each other's work, but they
cannot, they cannot seem to get it to work.
And I think I've been in that situation and
probably every scientist, you're like, why doesn't the experiment
work? And you, you start to think of yourself
as a failure. It's very rare that you think,
well, the other people didn't describe it well. You
usually will blame it on yourself. Um, I guess
I didn't do it correctly, uh, you know, I,
I, I was just a couple of seconds too
late, and that's why the experiment failed or things
like that. So we tend to, to Maybe be
ashamed of those results and not publish them. Most
journals will not accept them. Journals are looking for
novel findings that other people would love to hear
about, and there's just, it's very hard to publish
negative results to say, well, we, we couldn't reproduce
this, we couldn't make this work. And very often,
um, there's many reasons why experiments don't work. Sometimes
it's just this little, this little tiny thing that
you didn't think would be important. Let's say the,
the, the temperature in your room is just one
degree too hot or too low, or the shaker
doesn't shake the same way as the other people,
uh shaker or. There, the ozone concentration in the
air is too high and you had no idea
that that was important. But sometimes it could be
fraud. And so there have been a couple of
fraud cases where I was involved in where then
later people said, yeah, we could never reproduce that
paper. And then And and then you have to
think how many people try to reproduce it? How
many people spend money and time and. And tears
trying to make it to work. And, uh, and
that's just such a shame that we don't talk
about these things, that we don't have platforms to
publish negative results. There's a couple of journals who
start to do this, and that's great, but we
need more. And yeah, uh, I think 90% of
the, the things we do don't work and we
never publish them, and it's only the 10% that
does work, it gets published. So there's, there's so
much money being wasted on, on those negative results.
So I would like to ask you a little
bit more about citations now. Are there ways by
which researchers can artificially increase their citation metrics? And
in this particular case, I would like for you
to tell us specifically about the case of citation
rings.
Right. And, uh, I mean, you could, of course,
always sneak in that one extra paper that is
not maybe that relevant to your new paper and
sneak in one of your old papers and, oh,
now you have an extra citation. So I think
most people cite their own work because you, like
I said before, you build on each other's work
and you build on your own work. So sometimes
you will say, oh, we did, we did this
experiment exactly the way we did it in that
older paper. So that would count towards your citations.
Um. I've seen papers where people cites, uh, let's
say they have 50 citations, 50 references, and uh
20 of them are by their own from their
own lab or from their own. So that is
obviously frowned upon, but there's actually no rule and
then reviewer might not even see that. Citation rings,
that's a very creative way. So these are, I'm
not quite sure how it works, but I think
the way it works is that let's say a
group of people, I don't know, 50 people, 50
researchers form a secret group and they say we're
all gonna cite each other's papers. And so it's,
it doesn't really get noticed because, you know, these
people cite other people's papers, but the other folks
in the group cite their papers. And so it
all, in that way you all increase each other's
papers. And, and sometimes we see these papers where
um there's a statement, um. Like some, some general
statement, like I don't know, DNA sequencing has greatly
increased something, uh, and then there's, there's 10 references.
So between brackets it said reference 37 to 46
or so. And all those references are from, from
certain authors and, and if you really notice that
they might actually not. Be related to the topic
that they're cited in the context of. So it,
it's, it's a way that people sneak in references
and very often these are citation rings, but they're
sometimes very hard to recognize if a person, you
know, cites uh 20 of their own papers, of
course, we can see that. But if a person
cites 20 papers that are not very related and
are from that secret pact of, of, uh, of
the citation rings, it's very hard to notice that.
Mhm.
How about plagiarism? Is there lots of plagiarism in
the scientific literature?
Not as much as there was, let's say in
the early 2000s. So I actually started to become
a science detective by, because somebody had plagiarized my
work and I, I found out about it and
I was very mad and, um, and the paper
was I think around, published around maybe 2010 or
so, so I found it in 2013 and I
think in that time journals weren't really checking for
plagiarism very often. Um, IT was started that there
are some tools to check for plagiarism. It's basically
a glorified Google search where you just search if
somebody else used your text and um so later
journals, let's say around 20. Maybe 2010 or 2015
journals were starting more and more to use plagiarism
checkers. So I think real plagiarism is pretty rare
because it gets caught by both journals. Um, AND
I'm not talking about one or two sentences or
a couple of sentences in the methods where you
just described how you did a particular standard thing.
Those things I don't call plagiarism. I'm talking about
complete review articles that were completely plagiarized or were
a whole pair. GRAPHS were copy pasted. So that
is, that is, you know, the really bad plagiarism
that you don't find, uh, very often anymore, but,
um, there's, there's novel techniques to hide plagiarism and
in particularly, I need to mention, of course, artificial
intelligence because you can take a paragraph that somebody
else has written and if you're lazy, you just
say rewrite that paragraph in using check GBT. Um,
OR some other, uh, generative AI, and it will
generate a new text that is exactly the same
as the old, but it's revered. So you can
use your old plagiarism detector tools and you're, it's
not gonna flag it as plagiarism. But in reality,
it still is. It's still the same text, it's
reworded, but especially if you look at References, you
can see it's still using the same references. So,
it is very hard to recognize that. And, and,
and, you know, you can always say, well, I
just rewrote it, so it's not plagiarism. But with
AI you can, you can very quickly write an
article without doing anything yourself than just copy pasting
text that somebody else has written. And so it's,
it's increasingly hard to recognize plagiarized text. Um, AND
yeah, I'm a bit worried about that, but maybe
that's just the new tool we have and uh
maybe we shouldn't worry too much about how we're
gonna rewrite the same thing again because there's only
so many ways you can say, uh, you can
write an introduction, let's say about breast cancer or
so. I mean, you're gonna use the same terms,
you're gonna use the same statistics. And so maybe.
In the end, we, we shouldn't worry too much
about that type of plagiarism. But of course, when
it's plagiarism of data when you just steal somebody
else's data or even figures or photos, that is,
that is still wrong, of course. But I think
when you describe a particular problem in science, a
particular, like for the introduction, for example, you would
describe, you know, you would. Give the facts and
so I can sort of see that maybe we
shouldn't worry too much about pleasure. We cannot recognize
it anymore. If, if you're a smart fraudster, you'll
just use AI and you're gonna rewrite that paragraph.
Mhm.
So tell us a little bit about uh how
you do your work. I mean, what are the
most common ways you discover scientific fraud?
So I focus on images, on photos and uh
so I will look at scientific papers and And
search for duplicated images. Let's say within a paper
there's a bunch of photos, little panels, very often
western blots or photos of tissues or cells, and,
and the same photo is used twice. So it's
a duplicated photo, but one is experiment A and
one is experiment B, so they should not be
the same. That could be a sloppy, of course,
a sloppy, uh, you know, the researcher who just
grabbed the wrong photo. Sometimes photos overlap. So you
see that let's say one photo is experiment A,
one photo is labeled as a different experiment, experiment
B, but there's a little overlap that you can
find. And so that looks like it was the
same sample, maybe it was moved under a microscope
a little bit. So those are overlapping images, or
sometimes images are, are mirrored or, or rotated, things
like that. Uh, AND then the third type of
image duplication that I look for are photos that
within the photo there's duplicated elements. So it's one
photo. And you see the same cell 3 times
or the same type of tissue copy pasted a
couple of times. And yeah, that is, of course,
that's very bad because uh people do that intentionally.
Maybe to hide a crack or maybe to make
it look like uh there's more cells growing with
this drug or or fewer cells or things like
that. So, so those are the type of things
I'm, I'm looking for. I'm using my eyes, but
I'm also using tools. Uh, AND, and the tools
I'm using, uh, have databases of, of images in
other papers. So I might be able to find
papers that, um, that have stolen an image from
a different paper, or that the authors just reuse
their own. Uh, PHOTO again and make it look
like a different experiment. I need to very carefully
look, because sometimes the duplication is quite OK. Sometimes
it's quite OK to use the same control experiment.
Let's say you test two different drugs and you
have, you know, the, the, the, the not treated
cells versus drug one, and then the not treated
cells versus drug 2. So the, the control, the
not treated sample might be the same and that
is quite OK. So those are, are fine. I'm
not gonna flag those, um, but I'm trying to
find inappropriate duplications.
And what about using fake images? I mean, what
kinds of fake images do people use and where
do they get them?
Um, WELL, we have seen, uh, Western blots that
look very unrealistic, and we think they were generated
using artificial intelligence. Now, AI has, of course, Greatly
improved over the last 2 or 3 years. Uh,
BUT there was a period when AI was not
that good yet, I guess. And, and we saw
these weird blots, and I wasn't the first one
seeing it, but, but many other people had noticed
them. And all the, the, the western blots, they
look like horizontal stripes, but the backgrounds of these
blots was always the same. So it was, it
was hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of papers that
all had photos with the same backgrounds. And we're
like, that is weird. Uh, THAT they have to
have a common source. Uh, NOW, of course, the
technique of AI is so much better that you
can teach your, your artificial intelligence. You can just
give it a bunch of real photos and say,
generate a new photo for me. And I cannot
no longer use my software because it's not a
duplicated image. It's a novel, unique image. So these
are really, really hard to find. And I think
all of us have seen photos generated by AI
that look very realistic. Uh, SOMETIMES you can still
recognize that it's fake, but I think as the
technique gets better, it's very easy to generate photos
of, of tissues and cells and, and even of
human faces that are in. Distinguishable from, from the
real thing. And of course, if you are a
science fraudster, you will be very happy with this
technique because you don't no longer have to work
in the lab and you can crank out fake
paper after fake paper. So generative AI, especially when
it comes to image, you can, uh, when you
think about science integrity, I think it allows fraudsters
to. To generate more and more fake papers, and
I'm not quite sure how detect that. And if
we, I don't think we're ready for for that
amount of fraud.
Mhm. So tell us specifically about the case of
the rat with the big balls and the enormous
pins.
Yes, I, I wrote a blog post about it.
I mean, that was, uh, when was that? Last
summer or so. Uh, THAT was a very funny
image. It was not a photo, but it was
clearly generated by AI because it showed indeed a
rat with a giant penis and giant balls. And
it was supposed to be, it was published in
scientific papers, a paper in, in one of the
Frontier's journals. And, and it, I think it was
supposed to show how stem cells were isolated from
testicles of rats, which You know, that's a scientific
technique, but it wasn't very helpful. First of all,
because the, the anatomic um proportions of the rats
were quite wrong. I don't think rats have penises
like that. It rose into the, the skies. It
was just so big. Um. But also you couldn't,
I mean, that was funny, but obviously, we were
all having a hard, very, you know, good laugh
with it, but you couldn't read the labels, it
was just AI cannot really generate uh letters yet
very well, so you couldn't, it was just, you
couldn't read the letters, um. And uh yeah, it
was just um funny and not very useful from
a scientific point of view. That would not have
been that bad. And actually, the authors did disclose,
they used mid journey, which is one of the
generative AI uh tools to to generate images. But,
um, also the text of the whole article appeared
to have been generated using AI and, and they
had not disclosed that, and so the paper was
retracted. Very quickly, actually may ahead, but we all,
it was very funny. We all had a very
good laugh about it on, on, uh, on Twitter
and other social media. I think, and most scientists
probably have seen that image. And I wrote a,
a blog post about it. And, um, yeah, it's,
uh, so it's good that it was retracted, but
uh, it generated a lot of joy, I think,
in most people's hearts. Yeah.
There are also been cases of fake images of
signaling pathways. What is the problem with such
fakes? Um, YEAH, there's, there's several, um, science fields
that have been infected, if you will, with fake
images with, um, in the fields there have been
many papers that we think. HAVE been mass produced
by what we call paper mills, and, and these
are fake papers. And, and in some of the
fields in biology, it's, there's, let's say many different
molecules or there's many different types of cancers and
so you can just write an. AND then you
change one molecule into another molecule or you change
one cancer into another cancer, but you basically and
you rewrite the text a little bit, so nobody
would think it's the same text. But because you
have all these different combinations of different molecules or
pathways or cancers. It looks like a new paper
and uh we can almost recognize this by the
titles like um inhibition of uh noncoding RNA 123
by uh this pathway uh will decrease uh cell
growth in cancer through this pathway or something like
that. The, the tidal structures were very similar. Um,
SO, uh, the, the, uh, tadpole paper mill that
I referred to earlier, where all the Western blos
had exactly the same backgrounds, those all had very
similar title structures to the point where you could
just see the title and know it was the
same group who generated that. And these papers were,
were, were sold to. Different authors. These came all
from, uh, uh, people working in Chinese hospitals. And
yeah, it was basically the same paper written over
and over again. Text slightly changed, images slightly changed.
Um, BUT, but yeah, 6400 papers that we found
to all have this, use the same template.
And what happens to scientists who are caught committing
fraud?
Well, very often, almost nothing or nothing. Uh, UNFORTUNATELY,
uh, science is, is sort of like the Tour
de France, the big biking race where At some
point, a lot of people used doping and nobody
seemed to care and people were biking faster and
faster because they use doping and if you didn't
use doping, you would definitely not win the race
and nobody seemed to care. And of course at
some point people said we need to care about
the sport if we really care about biking and
you know, how good is an athlete versus how
How much doping do we use? We need to
check for doping. And so it changed the sports,
I think for the better. Um, BUT in science,
we're not at that stage yet. We, I think
we're starting to realize that there's a lot of
fraud, but very little happened. Occasionally a paper gets
retracted, uh, but it's not enough. Um, AND, and
especially the, the serial fraudsters, the people have produced
multiple papers with, with fraud, those folks seem to.
Very often not get uh punished, punished in any
way. They, there's very little consequences. Sometimes, especially when
it's a senior researcher, they usually will blame their
junior research assistants or grad students and maybe those
folks get fired, but the senior person. Keeps offloading.
That's, that's what we see. Uh, PAPERS often don't
get retracted or even corrected. Authors come up with
all kinds of stories trying to explain why this
cell is visible twice or 3 times or 100
times in the same photo, and the editors believe
it and they just issue a correction. It's just,
it seems that nobody, uh, at least until a
couple of years ago, that, that editors and journals
and publishers didn't really. Realize how big of a
problem it has had become. Now they are starting
to realize, but it's um yeah, there has been
a time where people were too naive. uh AND
institutions seem to also do very little. They um
Uh, very often senior research bringing a lot of
money, so an institution might have to decide like,
OK, are we gonna, let's say fire the fraudulent
professor. Or are we gonna keep him or her
on because they bring in so much money, so
many grants, and, and, and I think that a
lot of universities will, will just tell the, the
fraudulent person, oh, don't fraud anymore, or fraud better,
at least that we cannot catch you. Um, AND,
and because they, they really love, of course, the
money that some of these professors bring in and
Um, and the, you know, they have high publication
records, and that makes the university end up higher
in their rankings. And we all love the rankings,
and it's just, there's so much conflict of interest.
Um, YOU want these folks to be, you know,
leave signs, please, and don't fraud anymore. But in
reality, these people are not held accountable, and they
keep on frauding, and there's too many examples of
that.
So, let me ask you just a little bit
about retraction. When are papers retracted and, I mean,
how many among the ones that should be retracted
really get retracted?
Oh yeah. So, um, so, uh, taking a step
back, uh, a scientific paper, once it is peer
reviewed and published it, and, and somebody finds an
error in it. There's, there's several things that can
be done then to the paper. So the first
one is a correction. Uh, IT can be called
an aratum or a corrigenum, but it's basically all
the same thing. Um, THAT is usually used, let's
say there's a small error, 22 little photos were,
were switched, or there's a misspelling in the name
of one of the authors that happens a lot,
um, or they forgot to add, uh, I don't
know, the, the funder wasn't mentioned or things like
that. Small errors that don't really, yeah, influence the
paper. Um, AND then there can be an expression
of concern, which is usually, it's very often a
temporary thing, and it's good because it, it tells
you if the publishers puts that on the paper,
it knows there, it's usually because there's an ongoing
investigation or there are some bigger errors, we're still
thinking about it, but at least in the meantime,
we're warning the readers that there's a problem. And
then the, the, the most severe step that can
happen to a paper is a retraction. So the
paper will remain online. It's not that it's removed
from the interwebs. It will be labeled usually with
a watermark, retracted, will be, or like a big
red sign at the top. You can still read
it. Um, BUT basically it tells you that the
publisher or the, the journal editor no longer has
faith in the journal, and it's very often for
a fatal. Or, um, it could be because an
author, one of the authors found that one of
the calculations was completely wrong, completely changing the outcome.
So it can be started by an author who
says, Sorry, we found a big error. We're gonna
retract the paper, we're gonna redo the experiments, republish
it, maybe. And I think that is, that is
great when the authors actually recognized that there was
a big error and retract the paper, but most
often it is because of all kinds of Suspicions
of misconduct or big errors, let's say there's many
papers, many, uh, panel image panels that overlap. Uh,
MANIPULATED photos, uh, duplications, uh, to the extent where
you no longer have trust in the data, and
that is often by whistleblowers, by external people, maybe
by me when I see a big problem in
the paper, I will write to the editors and
then the editors will, uh, perhaps decide to retract
the paper. Now it doesn't happen as often as
I would like to see it. I I had
an I initially when I started to do this
work, I had a set of 800 papers in
which I found problems. Um, I wrote to the
editors and not all of these should be retracted,
obviously, some were small errors, but only 13 uh
was either corrected or retracted after waiting 5 years
and sending a reminder. And so 5 years seems
a very long time to take a decision, uh,
if a paper. You know, should be corrected or
retracted. So only 1/3 of these papers have been
taken action on and now we're in about 10
years later, it's only a little bit more than
half of the papers have either correction or retraction.
So it's very slow, uh, and in half of
the cases, um, even after waiting 10 years, nothing
happens, and it's so frustrating because we see a
big problem in the paper and the journals looked
out of way, and That is bad. If you,
if you know that your airbag of your car
is, uh, is, is faulty, you would hope that
there's a recall and that, you know, you, you
don't have to pressure the car manufacturer to, to
get a new car or to get it fixed.
And it seems that publishers in many cases, and
there's good exceptions, there's good publishers who really do
the right thing, but There's too many, uh, publishers
who don't seem to care about quality control. They
publish bad papers and then when people complain about
it, the customer service is also very bad and
it will be like buying a very expensive car,
realizing there's a problem, and then the dealer not
wanting to take any action. I think as customers
uh of buying, you know, people who bought a
car, you would not accept that. But in science,
we seem to all. Be OK with that, and
we should not be OK because we pay the
publishers a lot of money. And I'm not quite
sure what all that money goes to, but it
doesn't seem to go to quality control or customer
service, so that needs to change. And again, there
are good publishers who do the right thing, but
there's still too many who are too focused on
making money and not on uh quality control and
customer service.
And in the meantime, while we wait for the
paper to get corrected or retracted, it can be
cited several times,
yeah, that's a very good point. We, the reader
might not know that there's a big problem with
this paper. If I write to the editor, none
of the readers would know there's a big problem,
and that is why most. PEOPLE who work like
me who find problems in papers, we will post
on a website called Puppeer.com, like publication and peer
review pop peer, and we will, we will, uh,
flag papers for all kinds of problems. So if
you do a literature search, you can type in
the DOI, the unique identifier of the paper, and
you can see if somebody else has. Seen something
about the paper. It could be a positive command
or a negative command. Now most comments on Papa
are about image problems because they're visible, right? Like
it's very easy to see that a photo is
duplicated. It's much easier to see than that a
bar graph has been made up. Like that is
very often if you are a good fraudster, you
would, you, you, that would not be visible, but.
Uh, WE want to warn the, the readers of
these papers that there's particular problems. As soon as
I can find it, I will post it on
Pope. So within 5 minutes, it's on Papa, while
retractions take, you know, sometimes 10 years, and, and
that is just too slow. Like, why would it
take so long? And, and so it's frustrating and
all this time, people might think that the paper
is completely fine, they might not realize that there's
potential problems with it. So, um, it's a, it's
a very good point and that is why we're
We science detectives are very often frustrated with the
lack of response.
So, I have one final question slash topic I
would like to explore with you here today. So,
what do you think are the best solutions here?
How can we best combat fraud?
Yeah, it's a big question, right? Um, SO, well,
there's, there's multiple things you can think of. Of
course, we need to educate young people, um, you
know, at the start of their science career, what
is acceptable, what is OK, what are things you
should not be doing, um. That is one thing.
I think education is important, but I think at
the same time, there need to be consequences for
science fraud. There need to be quicker corrections and
retractions. There need to be um a lower threshold
for science fraud. Like if you find a photoshopped
image, you should not allow the authors to send
in a completely new set of figures that would
be, you know, winning the Tour de France, testing
positive for doping. And saying, well, just bring in
a clean sample in 2 weeks and we're all
good. No, that is just, no, that paper should
be retracted. There should be um bigger consequences for
people who have been caught fraud, uh, doing fraud
by their institutions, um, and funders, people who, who,
you know, they should not receive any funding for
the, for the next future. And some of these
things happen occasionally, but it seems. Too little too
late, it's too slow, um, so consequences, education, um,
those I think are the, the most important things
and, and I think we also need to focus
more on open science, um, you know, sharing your
data set, um, sharing, uh, negative results, publishing negative
results. And maybe doing science a little bit more
slowly, uh, being able to show that in, uh,
that experiments are reproducible. And, and sometimes I dream
about a new way of, of science publishing where
we publish smaller experiments, one experiment, one figure, and
then other people can reproduce that, and then say,
yes, we, we were able to exactly get the
same results or no, we could not do it.
Maybe am I missing something, you know, are there
certain Experimental conditions you didn't include or so, um,
as a way maybe to slow down science a
little bit, but make it more reproducible and, and
reliable, and I think we, we should just focus
more on that. But it, it's so easy to
focus on metrics and publications and how are we
gonna change our complete system? It's probably not gonna
happen anytime soon. But I think we need to
think about other ways of publishing our papers and
rewarding reproducibility and negative results publishing.
Great. So, Doctor Bick, just before we go, where
can people find you and your work on the
internet?
Well, I was on Twitter X, but now I'm,
I switched to Blue Sky, so Elizabeth Bick, my
name, um, you would, you should be able to
find me on Blue Sky. Um, I'm on LinkedIn,
I'm on, um, Science Integrity Digest, that is my
blog, um, and usually very responsive. Usually on Blue
Sky, I that that's where I'll, uh. Uh, YOU'LL
have the biggest chance of finding me. And if,
if I don't follow you, just ask me if
I can follow you so you can send me
a direct message and uh then I'll share my
email address and uh we can talk.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been really
fun and a real pleasure to talk with you.
Same as, yeah, same here. Thank you, Ricardo and
Uh, yeah, I hope everybody will stay very honest.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant Juan and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa.
Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale
back medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francaortolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishtim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Dio Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.